📖 Label Sync Between Machine and underlying Kubernetes Nodes (#7296)
kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api: docs/proposals/20220927-label-sync-between-machine-and-nodes.md

---

title: Label Sync Between Machine and underlying Kubernetes Nodes

> authors:

Reviewer: nit: might be good to add previous authors and/or reviewers
(not sure how this should be handled, feel free to resolve)

- "@fabriziopandini"
  reviewers:
-
creation-date: 2022-02-10
last-updated: 2022-02-26
status: implementable
replaces:
superseded-by:

---

# Label Sync Between Machine and underlying Kubernetes Nodes

## Glossary

Refer to the [Cluster API Book Glossary](https://cluster-api.sigs.k8s.io/reference/glossary.html).

## Summary

> This document discusses a means by which labels placed on Machine can be kept in sync with corresponding labels on the underlying Kubernetes Nodes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This document discusses how labels placed on a Machine can kept in sync with a Kubernetes Node.
```

## Motivation

> Managing labels on Kubernetes nodes is a long standing [issue](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/issues/493) in Cluster API.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Managing labels on Kubernetes nodes has been a long standing [issue](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/issues/493) in Cluster API.
```

> During [previous attempt](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/pull/6255) to address this issue (thanks @Arvinderpal for all the work) we discovered that this topic has several implications:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following challenges have been identified through various iterations:
```

- Define how labels propagate from Machine to node

> - Define how labels propagate from ClusterClass to KCP/MachineDeployments/Machine Pools and down to Machines

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Define how labels propagate from ClusterClass to KubeadmControlPlane/MachineDeployments/Machine Pools, and ultimately to Machines.
```

> - Define how to prevent that label propagation triggers un-necessary rollouts

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Define how to prevent that label propagation triggers unnecessary rollouts
```

With the "divide and conquer" principle in mind this proposal aims to address the first point only, while the remaining points are going to be addressed in separated, complementary efforts.

### Goals

> - Support label synchronizing from Machine to the corresponding Kunernetes nodes for the labels that fall under the Kubernetes `node-role.kubernetes.io/` and `node-restriction.kubernetes.io/` prefix

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Support label synchronizing from Machine to the corresponding Kubernetes nodes for the labels that fall under the Kubernetes `node-role.kubernetes.io/` and `node-restriction.kubernetes.io/` prefix
```
nit, same below

> - Support label synchronizing from Machine to the corresponding Kunernetes nodes for the labels that fall under the Kubernetes `node-role.kubernetes.io/` and `node-restriction.kubernetes.io/` prefix

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Support label sync from Machine to the linked Kubernetes node, limited to `node-role.kubernetes.io/` prefix and the `node-restriction.kubernetes.io` domain.
```

> - Support label synchronizing from Machine to the corresponding Kunernetes nodes for the labels that fall under the Cluster API `node.cluster.x-k8s.io/` prefix

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Support syncing labels from Machine to the linked Kubernetes node for the Cluster API owned `node.cluster.x-k8s.io` domain.
```

### Non-Goals

> - Support for arbitrary/user-specified label prefixes (but the design doesn't prevent us to eventually reconsider this in future if there is strong demand for this feature)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Support for arbitrary/user-specified label prefixes
```

## Proposal

### User Stories

#### Story 1

As a cluster admin/user, I would like a declarative and secure means by which to assign roles to my nodes. For example, when I do `kubectl get nodes`, I want the ROLES column to list my assigned roles for the nodes.

#### Story 2

As a cluster admin/user, for the purpose of workload placement, I would like a declarative and secure means by which I can add/remove labels on groups of nodes. For example, I want to run my outward facing nginx pods on a specific set of nodes (e.g. md-secure-zone) to reduce exposure to the company's publicly trusted server certificates.

#### Story 3

> As a cluster admin/user, I want that Cluster API label management on Kubernetes Nodes do not conflits with labels directly managed by users or by other controllers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a cluster admin/user, I want that Cluster API label management on Kubernetes Nodes doesn't conflict with labels directly managed by users or by other controllers.
```

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

While designing a solution for syncing labels between Machine and underlying Kubernetes Nodes two main concerns have been considered:

> - Security, because Node labels can be used to attract workload to a specific Machine

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Security, because Node labels can be used to schedule and/or limit workloads to a predetermined set of nodes. 
```

> - Impacts on other components applying labels on Kubernetes Nodes, like e.g. Kubeadm, CPI etc.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Impact on other components applying labels on Kubernetes Nodes, like e.g. Kubeadm, CPI etc.
```

### Label Prefixes

> The idea of scoping syncronization to a well defined set of labels is a first answer to security/concurrency concerns; labels to be managed by Cluster API have been selected based on following criteria:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The idea of scoping synchronization to a well defined set of labels is a first answer to security/concurrency concerns; labels to be managed by Cluster API have been selected based on following criteria:
```
(same in other places, also syncronizer)

- The `node-role.kubernetes.io` label has been used widely in the past to identify the role of aKubernetes Node (e.g. `node-role.kubernetes.io/worker=''`). For example, `kubectl get node` looks for this specific label when displaying the role to the user.

> - The `node-restriction.kubernetes.io/` prefix is recommended in the [Kubernetes docs](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/admission-controllers/#noderestriction) for things such as workload placement; according to https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/assign-pod-node/ also

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The `node-restriction.kubernetes.io` domain is recommended in the [Kubernetes docs](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/admission-controllers/#noderestriction) for things such as workload placement; according to https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/assign-pod-node/ also
```

>   labels like `example.node-restriction.kubernetes.io/fips=true` falls in this category (prefix =~ domain).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  labels like `example.node-restriction.kubernetes.io/fips=true` falls in this category.
```

> - Cluster API will define its own label prefix, `node.cluster.x-k8s.io/`; for consistency we consider also `example.node.cluster.x-k8s.io/gpu=true` in this category (prefix =~ domain).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Cluster API owns a specific domain: `node.cluster.x-k8s.io`.
```

#### Synchronization of CAPI Labels

> Only the labels that fall under the prefix described above will need to be kept in sync between the Machine and Node objects.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The synchronization of labels between a Machine object and its linked Node is limited to the domains and prefixes described in the section above.
```

> The syncronization process is going to use [server side apply](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/server-side-apply/) in order to ensure that Cluster API will manage only the subset of labels coming from Machine objects and ignore labels applied concurrently by other users/other components.

Reviewer 2: What happens during a move operation when the server side apply metadata is cleared?

Author: After restoring the controller will set again labels and metadata will be rebuilt, there is a gotcha in this operation (I have updated the next sequence to keep track of it; reporting here as well

> This requires to define an identity/manager name to be used by CAPI when performing this operation; additionally during implementation we are going to identify and address eventual additional steps required to properly transition existing Nodes to SSA, if required.
> From a preliminary investigation, the risk is that the manager that created the object and the new SSA manager will become co-owner of the same labels, and this will prevent deletion of labels.
Similar risks applies to clusterctl move or operations like velero backup/restore.

Reviewer: I think it would be good for clusterctl move in general to not modif the managed fields. (I don't know what the current behavior is)

I think this can be problematic in general

Author: thinking back to move, this is not an issue for Nodes (they live in the workload cluster, so they are not involved in the operation)

Reviewer: Very good catch. So not relevant for this proposal

Reviewer: I think we can resolve

> This requires to define an identity/manager name to be used by CAPI when performing this operation; additionally during implementation we are going to identify and address eventual additional steps required to properly transition existing Nodes to SSA, if required.

Reviewer: Q: Should we mention something about SSA <=> workload cluster Kubernetes version considerations (e.g. only do it for Kubernetes >= v1.22 or alternatives)

Or is this part of "transition existing Nodes to SSA"?

Author: @enxebre opinions?

Reviewer 3: [Context is ssa is enabled by default and beta since 1.16](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/) and [better owner tracking was added in 1.18](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2020/04/01/kubernetes-1.18-feature-server-side-apply-beta-2/#wasn-t-it-already-beta-before-1-18) @sbueringer can you re-elaborate the concerns?

Reviewer: We had issues when implementing Cluster topology reconciliation with SSA. IIRC the behavior changed a bit somewhere before v1.20, which is why we eventually restricted ClusterClass to mgmt clusters >=v1.22.

I'm not sure if those issue where with our final implementation or something we used before which was inspecting the managed fields (and their format changed between releases (?)).

@fabriziopandini Do you remember details?

It might be fine for >=v1.18 as we don't care in detail about how SSA uses managed fields

(cc @g-gaston that's the discussion around SSA I mentioned on the CRS proposal)

Author: For this effort, I think we can start by the assumption that SSA with all the supported releases will just work and do not introduce any new limitations on supported Kubernetes version upfront. We can eventually come back to this if tests prove us wrong. 

Note: The limitation on the management cluster version originated from the idea of relying on SSA internals / managed fields and results of tests surfacing some inconsistences in the older releases; then, when we finally moved to SSA dry-run, we dropped almost all those assumptions and now we mostly rely on the API server (there is only one place left where we patch managed fields).

> The syncronization process will be implemented in the Machine controller, so reconciliation is triggered both when Machine object changes or when the Node changes (the machine controller watches Nodes within the workload cluster).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The syncronization process will be implemented in the Machine controller. Reconciliation is triggered both when Machine object changes, or when the Node changes (the machine controller watches Nodes within the workload cluster).
```

#### Delay between Node Create and Label Sync

The Node object is first created when kubeadm joins a node to the workload cluster (i.e. kubelet is up and running). There may be a delay (potentially several seconds) before the machine controller kicks in to apply the labels on the Node.

Kubernetes supports both equality and inequality requirements in label selection. In an equality based selection, the user wants to place a workload on node(s) matching a specific label (e.g. Node.Labels contains `my.prefix/foo=bar`). The delay in applying the label on the node, may cause a subsequent delay in the placement of the workload, but this is likely acceptable.

In an inequality based selection, the user wants to place a workload on node(s) that do not contain a specific label (e.g. Node.Labels not contain `my.prefix/foo=bar`). The case is potentially problematic because it relies on the absence of a label and this can occur if the pod scheduler runs during the delay interval.

> One way to address this is to use kubelet's `--register-with-taints` flag. Newly minted nodes can be tainted via the taint `cluster.x-k8s.io=label-sync-pending:NoSchedule`. Assuming workloads don't have this specific toleration, then nothing should be scheduled. KubeadmConfigTemplate provides the means to set taints on nodes (see  JoinConfiguration.NodeRegistration.Taints).

Reviewer 4: Another option for to work around the inequality problem could be to use it together with equality. If you have a strict inequality requirement then using a selector of the type ~"contains `initialSyncCompleted` and not contains `my.prefix/foo=bar` would work. This feels like it could be tricky for the users and NoSchedule is likely more straight forward. But this would allow all other workloads to just deploy immediately. So just throwing it out there.

Reviewer: Interesting idea. So essentially folks would add an additional label everywhere to signal that the sync was done and they can select on that label being there + another one isn't.

@fabriziopandini Wondering if this is good enough to avoid implementation of the entire taint thing.

Considering that probably most of the use cases are selection on equality and are using taints otherwise I think it could be good enough for now (we could have an issue to see if there's demand for a builtin solution vs the trick with labels described here)

> One way to address this is to use kubelet's `--register-with-taints` flag. Newly minted nodes can be tainted via the taint `cluster.x-k8s.io=label-sync-pending:NoSchedule`. Assuming workloads don't have this specific toleration, then nothing should be scheduled. KubeadmConfigTemplate provides the means to set taints on nodes (see  JoinConfiguration.NodeRegistration.Taints).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One way to address this is to use kubelet's `--register-with-taints` flag. Newly minted nodes can be tainted via the taint `node.cluster.x-k8s.io=machine-pending:NoSchedule`. Assuming workloads don't have this specific toleration, then nothing should be scheduled. KubeadmConfigTemplate provides the means to set taints on nodes (see  JoinConfiguration.NodeRegistration.Taints).
```

It might be useful to define the taint in the newly defined domain, and make it generic enough that it can be used for other initialization steps as well in the future.

Author: what about `node.cluster.x-k8s.io=initialization-pending:NoSchedule`

Reviewer: Given

> kubelets specifying --cloud-provider=external will add a taint node.cloudprovider.kubernetes.io/uninitialized with an effect NoSchedule during initialization. This marks the node as needing a second initialization from an external controller before it can be scheduled work. Note that in the event that cloud controller manager is not available, new nodes in the cluster will be left unschedulable. The taint is important since the scheduler may require cloud specific information about nodes such as their region or type (high cpu, gpu, high memory, spot instance, etc).

What about: `node.cluster.x-k8s.io=uninitialized:NoSchedule`

Author: updated to node.cluster.x-k8s.io=uninitialized:NoSchedule

The process of tainting the nodes, can be carried out by the user and can be documented as follows:

```
If you utilize inequality based selection for workload placement, to prevent unintended scheduling of pods during the initial node startup phase, it is recommend that you specify the following taint in your KubeadmConfigTemplate:
`cluster.x-k8s.io=label-sync-pending:NoSchedule`

> ```

Reviewer 2: Some clarification here, if the NoSchedule taint from Cluster API is present, even if the affinity is specified with inequality, workloads won't be scheduled on those nodes, correct? Unless someone actually tolerates that taint as well, the system should work as intended, and no further action from users is necessary here

Author: yes that's correct

After the node has come up and the machine controller has applied the labels, the machine controller will also remove this specific taint if it's present.

> In the future, we may consider automating the insertion of the taint via CABPK.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 2: We should do this now if that's the preferred path?

Author: @enxebre opinions?

Pushing this a little bit further, we can even also add this in the bootstrap provider contracts as an optional (but recommended) behavior to support inequality-based selection for workload placement

Reviewer 3: My only concern is that built-in tainting would has a workload scheduling delay impact on every upcoming Node, may be that's negligible. May be is not a bad idea start with letting it be opt-in and revisit based on usage feedback.

Reviewer 2: Isn't the delay wanted in this case? If let's say a user is scaling up a cluster to satisfy workload requirements, and we have a number of pods waiting to be scheduled on new nodes, if there are affinity rules, it might be the case that pods gets scheduled on the wrong node to begin with.

Reviewer 3: yes, but if built-in the delay would also apply unnecessarily to scenarios where no affinity is intended at all, but may be that's just fine.

Reviewer: I wonder how big the delay is. IIRC usually the cloud-provider has a taint as well which is only removed after the providerID is set. I can imagine that it doesn't take that long from the cloud-provider setting the providerID/dropping their taint to us removing our taint

Author: I don't think that the delay will change from users adding the taint in the kubeadmConfig as we are suggesting above to CAPI Adding the taint by default.
The UX will improve though, so I will rephrase this so we explore this option

Reviewer: > I don't think that the delay will change from users adding the taint in the kubeadmConfig as we are suggesting above to CAPI Adding the taint by default.

I think Alberto's point was the delay between not having the taint at all and automatically having it via CABPK.

Author: updated

One way to address this is to use kubelet's `--register-with-taints` flag. Newly minted nodes can be tainted via the taint `node.cluster.x-k8s.io=uninitialized:NoSchedule`. Assuming workloads don't have this specific toleration, then nothing should be scheduled. KubeadmConfigTemplate provides the means to set taints on nodes (see  JoinConfiguration.NodeRegistration.Taints).

The process of tainting the nodes, can be carried out by the user and can be documented as follows:

```
If you utilize inequality based selection for workload placement, to prevent unintended scheduling of pods during the initial node startup phase, it is recommend that you specify the following taint in your KubeadmConfigTemplate:
`node.cluster.x-k8s.io=uninitialized:NoSchedule`
```

After the node has come up and the machine controller has applied the labels, the machine controller will also remove this specific taint if it's present.

> During the implementation we will consider also automating the insertion of the taint via CABPK in order to simplify UX.

Reviewer 5: This proposal will also affect 3rd party bootstrap providers, should we make taint insertion a provider contract in case it will be automated in CAPBK?

Author: yes, if we go down this path this should be documented in the contract as optional requirement. I will add a note

Author: done!

---

> title: Label Sync Between Machine and underlying Kubernetes Nodes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Label Sync Between Machines and underlying Kubernetes Nodes
```
nit

## Proposal

### User Stories

#### Story 1

As a cluster admin/user, I would like a declarative and secure means by which to assign roles to my nodes. For example, when I do `kubectl get nodes`, I want the ROLES column to list my assigned roles for the nodes.

#### Story 2

As a cluster admin/user, for the purpose of workload placement, I would like a declarative and secure means by which I can add/remove labels on groups of nodes. For example, I want to run my outward facing nginx pods on a specific set of nodes (e.g. md-secure-zone) to reduce exposure to the company's publicly trusted server certificates.

#### Story 3

As a cluster admin/user, I want that Cluster API label management on Kubernetes Nodes doesn't conflict with labels directly managed by users or by other controllers.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

While designing a solution for syncing labels between Machine and underlying Kubernetes Nodes two main concerns have been considered:

- Security, because Node labels can be used to schedule and/or limit workloads to a predetermined set of nodes.
- Impact on other components applying labels on Kubernetes Nodes, like e.g. Kubeadm, CPI etc.

> ### Label Prefixes

Reviewer: Nit: Should this be just Labels or Labels domains & prefixes now? (given we only have one prefix now)

Author: done

  we are considering the entire domain, thus also labels like `example.node-restriction.kubernetes.io/fips=true` falls in this category.

- Cluster API owns a specific domain: `node.cluster.x-k8s.io`.

#### Synchronization of CAPI Labels

The synchronization of labels between a Machine object and its linked Node is limited to the domains and prefixes described in the section above.

The synchronization process is going to use [server side apply](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/server-side-apply/) in order to ensure that Cluster API will manage only the subset of labels coming from Machine objects and ignore labels applied concurrently by other users/other components.

This requires to define an identity/manager name to be used by CAPI when performing this operation; additionally during implementation we are going to identify and address eventual additional steps required to properly transition existing Nodes to SSA, if required.
From a preliminary investigation, the risk is that the manager that created the object and the new SSA manager will become co-owner of the same labels, and this will prevent deletion of labels.

> Similar risks applies to clusterctl move or operations like velero backup/restore. 

Author: Dropped both, the same consideration apply

The syncronization process will be implemented in the Machine controller. Reconciliation is triggered both when Machine object changes, or when the Node changes (the machine controller watches Nodes within the workload cluster).

#### Delay between Node Create and Label Sync

> The Node object is first created when kubeadm joins a node to the workload cluster (i.e. kubelet is up and running). There may be a delay (potentially several seconds) before the machine controller kicks in to apply the labels on the Node.

Reviewer 3: just a nit but I wouldn't specify kubeadm here as regardless the bootstrapping choice ultimately the kubelet is responsible for specifying the labels on node creation.

## Summary

This document discusses how labels placed on a Machine can kept in sync with the corresponding Kubernetes Node.

## Motivation

Managing labels on Kubernetes nodes has been a long standing [issue](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/issues/493) in Cluster API.

The following challenges have been identified through various iterations:

- Define how labels propagate from Machine to node.
- Define how labels propagate from ClusterClass to KubeadmControlPlane/MachineDeployments/Machine Pools, and ultimately to Machines.
- Define how to prevent that label propagation triggers unnecessary rollouts.

With the "divide and conquer" principle in mind this proposal aims to address the first point only, while the remaining points are going to be addressed in separated, complementary efforts.

### Goals

> - Support label sync from Machine to the linked Kubernetes node, limited to `node-role.kubernetes.io/` prefix and the `node-restriction.kubernetes.io` domain.

Reviewer 3: For these ones, support additive on creation only sync?

Reviewer: If we get SSA to work we can sync them continuously (which I would prefer as it's simpler and more intuitive to understand)

> - Support syncing labels from Machine to the linked Kubernetes node for the Cluster API owned `node.cluster.x-k8s.io` domain.

Reviewer 3: For these ones, support authoritative sync?

Author: being authoritative means other controllers are not allowed to set any node restriction on the node; I'm not sure how many tools are doing this, but If we go we go down the authoritative path I think we will discover this the hard way.
I would prefer to avoid this...

Reviewer: As mentioned elsewhere, I think the SSA-way of being authoritative would be ideal, aka being authoritative for all the labels we want to set now or we did set on the previous reconcile.

Reviewer 3: In this comment I was referring to `cluster.x-k8s.io`
In this [other comment](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/pull/7296#discussion_r984442648) I was referring to the other ones.

Reviewer: Ah I see. So the question is if we want to drop other labels in the `node.cluster.x-k8s.io` domain from the Node that are not set on the Machine. I.e. CAPI / the machine controller would be the only ones setting labels in that domain.

Sounds good to me, but no strong opinion from my side

Author: I think that if we go down the path to implement SSA, then we should keep everything consistent and manage only the labels we own (I won't make a special case for making `node.cluster.x-k8s.io` authoritative, it seems unnecessary complication).

Reviewer: Agree
